---
author: 7sharp9
date: '2011-01-09 23:11:05'
layout: page
slug: services
status: publish
title: Services
wordpress_id: '47'
---

We offer a variety of software development solution's to meet the demands of
modern day enterprise environments.

### Web based products

We build everything in .Net, Asp.Net 4.0 and Silverlight 4.0.

### Desktop based products

We can build anything from a traditional WinForms application through to a WPF
application. We can also build desktop based Silverlight applications.

### Servers / Service orientated architectures

We can build everything from traditional Asp.Net Web services through to WCF
services including bespoke architectures and Windows services. We specialise
in building scalable enterprise software architectures and have extensive
experience in this field.

### Long-term Support and incremental enhancements

We built software to exacting requirements, we use a highly agile approach
that allows granular feature development so your bespoke application can
really do what you envisaged.

### Business productivity / systems integration

Do you have existing internal and external systems that are not connected
together?  We can create a bespoke framework that will increase you
productivity and mesh together your system so that they work together
seamlessly. A lot of small and mid sized business still have a lot of manual
tasks that need to be performed again and again, we can automate your critical
workflows and you can benefit from increased productivity.

### Performance profiling and code analysis

Do you have in-house systems that have performance problems and memory issues?
We can find weak spot in your existing applications and memory leaks and
performance problems.

### General software development consultancy

Have you identified a potential software solution or idea for some complex
aspects of your organisation?  Are you wondering whether it is feasible or
cost effective.  We have designed and delivered a wide range of projects from
both the public and private sector.  We are also familiar with the latest
cutting edge technologies in the software development world.  With this
knowledge and experience, we can provide consultancy around practicality and
also advise whether this will be within your time and budget constraints.

